- Hello and welcome to C Programming for Everybody.
I'm Charles Severance and I'm your professor for this course.
In this lecture, we are going to do a very rapid translation
from Python to C.
So as I've shown you in our earlier lectures,
C is kind of like the mother tongue
of advanced programming languages.
Python itself was written and still is written in C.
And Python is deeply influenced by C,
even though the syntax looks very different, right?
And if you've taken all my other classes,
you will have seen PHP, you'll have seen JavaScript.
And to some degree, even CSS takes some of its inspiration
from the syntax of C.
And so I'm not intending for this
to be your first programming class.
I intend for you to be an expert at Python.
Well, not expert, but certainly,
I'm not gonna tell you what an if statement is.
I'm not gonna tell you what a variable is.
I'm gonna just tell you how to use variables in C
and I'm gonna tell you how to use if statements in C.
And so that's why a solid foundation of Python,
not wizard, but solid foundation of Python is essential.
And frankly, I would rather that you learned a bit of PHP,
some JavaScript, and all this other stuff before you come.
I think that C programming is not the first class
that you should take, but instead,
it is your gateway to the advanced work
that you're going to do.
And so I think C is very, very important.
I just don't think it's your first programming class.
So, you might think Python and C are not very different,
although Python is written in C.
Python has whitespace that is part of its syntax.
C whitespace is ignored.
I do like C better in that.
Python is very object oriented.
If you read an article I wrote on Quora,
you'll see I rank all my languages
and I put JavaScript and Python
as the most object oriented languages.
Java is a little less object oriented
and C is like the least un-object oriented.
C is not object oriented at all.
Python has wonderfully convenient data structures
in the form of lists and dictionaries.
PHP has arrays and JavaScript has objects,
the all beautiful, beautiful stuff.
They're very object oriented structures.
Python, C does not.
It's fast, it's efficient, it's powerful,
it's got structs and pointers,
and by golly, you will use them
and they're not convenient,
but they are scorchingly fast.
And by the time we're done with all this,
we will see how to use structs and pointers
to build lists and dictionaries.
And that really is, we will follow down the path
of building Python.
So you'll see a common theme throughout this class
of how Python achieves what it's trying to achieve
by writing C.
Python has automatic memory management
to the point where if you've been a Python programmer,
or a PHP programmer, or a Java programmer,
or a JavaScript programmer,
you probably don't even know what memory management is.
Well, you're going to by the end of this class.
And by the end of this class,
you're going to be able to see how Python
automates memory management for you, right?
Python is written in the 80s,
and C was written in the 70s.
In many ways, I see Python as a convenience layer
that was built on top of C.
Just, C programmers look at C, it's like,
it's great, it's great, it's great.
If we just had this layer of easiness on top of it,
then things would be better.
And so, that's what Python is.
Now, Python also introduced things like
quite different syntax to make it indentation
required, because they thought it was a good idea.
So we could argue one way or the other.
I mean, I'll tell you,
when I'm writing a million lines of code,
white space is not, to me, a good way to have syntax.
So, we're going to look at C through a Python lens.
And we're going to learn by example.
Now, most of the time, I tell you,
don't copy and paste.
Don't cheat.
Don't look for solutions.
This lecture is the exception to that rule.
I've written this lecture as a Rosetta stone.
It's just a little tiny bit of connection
to what you already know in Python,
to what you're going to do in C.
And so, I'm not intending at this point
for you to build your own stuff based on reading a book.
I actually just want you, and if I give you assignments
to do these particular things,
I really do want you to just watch this lecture,
grab the PowerPoint, and feel free to cut and paste
from my PowerPoint into my assignments.
Because this is, I don't know if you've ever seen it,
where the mama tiger is teaching a baby tiger how to hunt,
and the mama tiger goes out and gets something or other
and brings it back and puts it near the baby tiger
and lets the baby tiger chase it.
Well, that's kind of what I'm doing.
I'm the mama tiger, and I'm giving you some C code,
and I'm putting it right in front of you,
and then I want you to take that C code,
and I want you to run it and play with it and understand it.
So, I'm not expecting in this lecture
that you're going to derive it,
that you're going to sort of somehow read the textbook,
look at a problem, and solve the problem.
That's later.
That is, that's absolutely later.
So, this is the beginning.
This is trying to make connections,
conceptual connections, to the complex knowledge
you have about Python, to little places
where you can hook things onto in C.
And so, the idea is to go through it quickly.
So, I do assign some of these as programming exercises.
It's intended for me, my intent is that you'll watch
the lectures and just work on the code at the same time.
I'm not trying to test what you learned.
I really want you to watch and listen and type.
That's how we learn, right?
You could cut and paste it, or you could type it,
and you could type it one piece at a time.
And the mere act of you typing,
even though you're just looking at a slide
and typing it in, at this point in the course,
that is the learning objective of this lecture.
Now, that whole rule of just typing code in
that you're looking from someone else,
don't do that forever.
Later, I want you to do things like
synthesize what you learn in the book,
synthesize it, struggle through it,
and figure things out and do the assignment yourself.
So, don't go searching.
If you wanna gain maximum benefit,
if you're just in the biggest hurry of all,
just go ahead and search.
But please, if you want benefit from this class,
don't cheat yourself.
There's a lot of similarities that I'm not gonna cover.
You can go read the textbook,
like the plus, minus, asterisk, slash, and percent.
Hey, probably when you were learning Python,
you're like, whoa, what's this percent thing?
And why did they choose percent?
And the answer is, that's what C chose.
And so, modulo is just percent in all these other languages
because they flipped a coin in C
and decided percent was modulo.
The comparison operators,
the assignment operator is equal sign,
which means that the equality operator's
gotta be double equals, exclamation equals,
less than, greater than, less than, equal.
All that stuff's the same.
Variable naming rules, the same.
You start with a letter, underscore,
and then numbers, letters, and underscores.
And case matters, both languages.
While loops, the concept of break and continue,
which some people get all worried about.
I love break and continue.
If you've taken my other courses
and you'll see when we talk about it in C,
I love break and continue in C, too.
Maybe 'cause I learned C first,
and I just love break, and you,
okay, enough about that.
I love break and continue.
Okay, enough about that.
Constants, about the only thing
that's really different in constants
is like strings and characters and booleans.
And strings and characters are like the biggest thing
in the beginning.
Both have int and float and char and byte.
Now, again, byte and string and char are not the same thing.
C has no str class, which is the string class,
list or dictionary.
And Python has no concept of struct or double.
And in a sense, you could think of Python's float
as really C's double, right?
And so, by the time Python was written,
the notion of shorter floating point numbers
is less critical.
There are some differences.
A lot of this, I think, was in the design of Python,
trying to be a little less obtuse and a little more
convenient.
For me, it's annoying.
I write the C versions of the operators,
like and, double ampersand, not is exclamation point,
we call that bang, or double vertical bar.
And in Python, they're all convenient.
We use the word A and B, but okay, whatever.
So there, in C, we have a for loop,
but it's an indeterminate loop,
if you remember the definition from Python for everybody.
Indeterminate loop is one that you have to examine
to see if it's got an infinite loop.
Whereas in Python, if you say for x in some list,
you're gonna go through the whole list.
It's a determinant loop.
It only runs until that list is exhausted.
C does not have such a thing, right?
It just, every loop has got a condition to finish it.
Now we write loops like for i equals one to 100,
or zero to 99.
We write them, and you can look at them and say,
yeah, that's not an infinite loop.
It's just, technically, you have to look at the loop
to make sure that you haven't inadvertently
made an infinite loop.
There's no predefined true and false.
I find this really like, wow, couldn't they,
they got EOF, capital EOF for end of file in C.
None and null are similar concepts, but quite different.
None in Python is its own type.
Null is the number zero.
That's cast to be a pointer to nothing.
And so, none is like specially marked empty.
Null is a zero.
We'll get there, we'll get there.
Strings and character arrays, for a while,
you can kind of pretend that character arrays in C
are mostly like strings, like when you throw a constant
and you pass it to a function, they kind of look the same.
But like, once we start working with them,
you'll see they're very, very different.
That's kind of the first fun part,
the first part of this class,
is like strings are now your responsibility.
There's no help, right?
And C, of course, has no list or dictionary,
and Python has no concept of tightly packed data,
which is what structs are, and doubles and floats.
So here we go, let's get started.
Let's see if my pen is working here, yeah.
So what we're gonna see is on one side,
we're gonna see some Python.
On the other side, we're gonna see some C.
And so this is just talking about output.
This is Python 3, of course.
And so we have a print function,
and it takes any number of parameters.
One of the things you'll notice about the print function
is like, hello, space world.
Well, that's part of this constant.
But answer comma 42 puts a little space
in between answer and 42 in the output.
So if you wanna suppress
that kind of automatic addition of spacing,
you have to maybe concatenate things together,
or are some other trick.
The print statement automatically knows
if it's got a string, or a float, or an integer,
and it just does things kinda all automatically.
And so if you wanna see something,
usually you just print it, okay?
So let's take a look at the compare and contrast.
So first off, pretty much you're gonna have to start
every one of your C programs
with pound include standard io.h.
Comments are different.
Python comments are pound sign to the end of the line.
C comments are slash star across multiple lines
to star slash, so everything in between there.
That can be multiple lines.
Later versions of C also add the,
what's called the C++ style of comments in the JavaScript,
uses those as comments, which is the double slash.
So when you're writing, you probably can use double slash
in the C that you're using,
but I'm kinda being kinda strict,
and so I'm pretending I'm in 1978,
so I'm not using that C++ style comment.
Again, that came from C++, it didn't come from JavaScript.
Some of you have taken Python classes
where there's this like underscore underscore main,
and it calls this thing, and it makes a function,
and calls it, and indents everything one tab,
and they're really imitating C in that respect.
And I think, I don't like that style.
I think those people who do that in Python,
I'm sure they have a good reason,
but I think they're just like wishing it was C.
'Cause the definition of C is the code,
a program starts, when it starts running,
it searches for a function named main,
and later we'll see that this function
can actually have arguments,
and it returns an integer as to the success or failure.
So really, main is a function.
And so that first line there,
int main open paren close paren open curly brace,
that is the definition of a function
that happens to be named main.
And then we have printf.
Now, again, I don't know if you've learned Python 2,
but in Python 2, there was a print statement.
In Python 3, there is a print function,
and so here we're using a Python 3 print function,
and C never did the statement.
So C decided, as we'll talk about later,
to not have any input/output,
any reading or writing in the language itself,
but instead put them in standard libraries.
And that's what this pound includes, stdio.h is saying,
okay, I'm gonna do some IO here, input/output here,
and so include the C input/output library.
Okay, and so printf takes as its first parameter a string.
The other thing you see in C
is you can't use single quotes for long strings.
Later we'll see single quotes,
but in C there's a major difference
between single quotes and double quotes.
Single quotes are single characters,
and double quotes are a character array.
Not a string, character array.
The other thing is things like the end of line.
So in Python, the new line is added implicitly.
In C, you have to add it explicitly.
And so that's basically saying print hello world,
and then go to the beginning of the next line.
Now, this first parameter is actually not just a string.
It's a string with embedded format codes
that start with percent.
Percent D says there is a corresponding integer number,
and I want you to convert that into a string
and print it out.
I guess I should probably just re-array some of this.
So it says answer, and then a number.
And so you can have more than one of these things,
and then they match.
So that says there's an integer as another parameter.
So you can have one parameter, two parameters, et cetera.
So for beyond one parameter, like in this one,
X percent dot one F,
that corresponds to this first floating point number,
and this percent D corresponds to the integer one, okay?
So you have these percent things.
Now, we will learn that these percent things
have a language unto themselves in chapter eight.
And this is basically saying,
please print me a floating point number
with only one digit of precision, right?
So percent dot one F says print a floating point number.
And then if we wanna string, it's percent S,
but this really, Sarah here, double quote Sarah, double quote,
is a character array.
And it's actually not five characters, but six,
because there is always a terminating zero character
at the end.
And so percent S says the parameter needs to be
a character array and properly terminated
by an end to string indicator, which is a zero character.
So that's this, right?
It's pretty simple,
but we've got a lot of stuff to cover here.
And this is the Rosetta Stone.
It's more complex in C, you have more control,
you're doing things more explicitly,
and it's not doing it for you automatically.
So let's take a look at a simple number input.
Now you'll see that some of these things come from
my Python for everybody class.
This is the famous US floor to European floor elevator,
converter.
So we're gonna print something out.
Now one thing about C is that you've got to declare
all your variables.
Python is sort of a typeless language.
It's increasingly getting more typey,
but it's a typeless language.
So we have to declare that we're gonna have two variables,
USF and EUF, and they're gonna be integers.
We print the statement, but the only difference there
is we have to put the backslash n in,
otherwise it won't automatically do that.
And then we have this IO routine, again,
coming from stdio.h, called scanf.
And its first parameter, much like printf,
is actually a formatting string.
And what this says is this says,
read four little ways, find me a number,
as long as it seems like a number, keep reading,
and turn that into an integer and give it back to me.
And so it actually has got some scanning built into it.
And it reads until it finds a non-digit,
and then stops and says that's the number.
So it turns out, in C, the way,
you could type a lot of different things here.
We won't go into that in too much detail.
We'll hold that until chapter eight.
But the idea is it doesn't work exactly the same,
although this input in Python reads a line.
Now, again, I got this little note here.
If you recall, if you recall, in Python 2,
there was an input and a raw input.
And raw input was what read a line,
which I tended to use when I was teaching Python 2.
Input was a weird thing that had
some kind of scanning thing going on,
and it scanned and threw stuff away,
and it grabbed something,
and it might go to multiple lines.
And it was totally inconsistent,
and it was worse than scanf.
So I was really glad when they just got rid of it
in Python 3, and then they changed the name.
What used to be Python 2's raw input
became input in Python 3.
So the old input from Python 2 is kind of like homage
to scanf in C, but it's not exactly the same.
And the reason it's not the same is
the input in Python 2 was deriving the type of the data
from what it encountered.
So it might give you back a string,
it might give you back a floating point,
it might go like, ooh, that's dangerous, right?
And that's because the type of USF in Python here
is determined, it's not pre-declared.
So it's known because we're gonna convert it to an integer.
And by the way, both the input and the scanf,
we can write stuff that confuses it badly
and causes it to blow up,
but we're not worrying too much about that right now.
We're just kinda getting the basics done.
So we read an integer, we subtract one,
we print it out, right?
We read an integer, oh, I forgot to say this ampersand.
Call by reference and call by value.
So in Python, this is coming back as a function return,
so it's really easy to assign it into USF.
Whereas in C, we put these parameters on scanf call,
and we have to say, oh, and by the way,
I want you to change it.
Because ultimately, if we don't put ampersand on,
it's what's called call by value, not call by reference.
And ampersand USF is a way to tell C
to actually give it the address of the USF variable
rather than the value in the USF variable.
And in that is a whole chapter that we will cover,
like I think four and five,
will be all about the ampersand and call by reference.
And call by, we're way ahead,
'cause I don't think chapters one through four would,
all they ever do is mention call by reference
and then say, oh, that's in the future.
So I'm gonna just say, oh, that's in the future.
I will tell you that that ampersand is really important
and the code doesn't work without it
because it is the way that C does call by reference
for simple variables like integers and floats.
As you're gonna see on the next slide,
there's always an exception.
String input, okay.
So here we're gonna, this is a help my hello Sarah thing,
right, we say enter your name and then we say name input.
Now the beauty is here in Python
is input gives us a whole line, okay.
And then we just print hello name
and you'll notice that there's like this little space
that comes out automatically.
So switching over to C, we have our included library,
we have the int main, which is the,
and then we have to pre-declare a character array.
There is no like, make it a string.
If this were Python, we could say,
hey, let's make a string, but you can't.
And what's even more important
is you gotta tell it how long,
which means that we could type too much stuff in here
and blow our program up.
And that's one of the difficulties of C
is the fact that arrays, including character arrays,
have fixed length and they don't auto-extend.
There is no, there is no dot append in C.
You can't like say, oh, name dot append, you can't do it.
Python, it's an object, it's not an actual array.
Python, it's an object.
Name is a string object.
Here, name is a character array with 100 elements
and if you put 20 in, you'll be fine.
If you put 80 in, you'll be fine.
If you put 101 in, it's gonna blow up.
Ah, well, that's okay.
That's why C is fast.
We'll get to all that, we'll get to all that.
So we print out a prompt and we say scanf
and we say, in this case, %s, give me a string,
and you can put a limit on it.
So we're saying, look, only read up to 100 characters.
And you'll notice there is no ampersand on name
and that is because name is an array.
And so when you put name in with no square brackets,
no index operator, then you're passing the address
of the beginning of the array.
And so that is, in a sense, an ampersand.
That is the location of the beginning
of a 100-character array.
We're gonna scan up to 100 characters into it
and so it really is roughly equivalent to the input.
And then we just, again, say, hello, %s
and then name is the corresponding thing.
And so it says, hello, Sarah.
Now a lot of what we did in the Python for everybody
is read whole lines of input.
And we tended to use string parsing of those lines,
like we would trim the stuff off the end
and then we'd split it and do all these things.
And there's no good split in C.
So we won't be doing too much of that,
but it does help to understand
how to read a whole line of input.
So now we're gonna read something that doesn't have,
it has lots of spaces, we're gonna read the whole line
and we're just gonna echo the whole line, right?
Enter line, read the line, print the line.
So now we're gonna have, again,
we have to declare how big of a string we're willing to take,
char line with 1,000 characters in it.
The prompt by now should be pretty easy
and we have a really weird looking
% square bracket, caret, backslash,
and close square bracket, 1,000s.
Well, if you took Python for everybody
and you remember chapter 11, regular expressions,
that should look familiar to you.
Open bracket, caret, backslash, and close bracket
says match any character that's not a new line.
So that says scan up to the end of a line
or until you hit 1,000 characters.
Read a whole line, but stop at 1,000 characters.
And then, of course, a line is just a parameter
and then we print that thing out, okay?
And so a lot of C programmers probably never written
this particular line of code, but it gives you a sense
that there's a lot of sort of programmability
and things like regular expressions that Python had.
Well, those are kind of an old concept.
Those are seven 1970s concepts.
This C language had that concept in it in 1970.
There's another way that's a little safer to do this,
and these are the exact same thing
where this command fgit s.
So fgit s says put it into up to 1,000 characters,
looking for a new line, and reading
from what's called standard input.
So in C there are three basic files.
One is the standard input,
which usually is read up to EOF, standard output,
which is where printf is going,
and then there's a thing called standard error,
which is where you send error messages
that you don't just wanna go to the output.
So the input and the output,
like if you're gonna make a program to do uppercase,
you would read your input, you would uppercase it,
and then send it out.
But if, for example, you encountered a character
that you didn't wanna copy and you wanted to send an error,
says I'm not gonna copy,
you wouldn't just send it to standard output,
you actually send it to standard error.
When you're running just on a terminal,
like in your command line, standard input is your keyboard,
standard output is your screen,
and standard error is your screen.
So you can see both the error messages
and the output of the program.
But if you're running sort of
with redirecting input and output,
you do tend to still see the error message on your screen,
and it doesn't end up hidden in some standard output.
But in this case, we're using FGATS,
which is part of the standard library,
and we are saying read this from standard input.
Now, you'll see in a second when we read a file,
FGATS can read a file,
and that third parameter is the file handle,
but there are three predefined file handles in C programs,
standard in, standard out, and standard error.
They're all named STDIN, that's their name.
They're predefined constants in the C standard,
STDIO.H library.
Okay, so now we're gonna read a file.
We do this a lot in Python.
We go get a file handle, it reads it.
This might fail, of course, if the file doesn't exist,
and we got a nice determinant loop.
Remember, we're talking about independent loops
and this for in, it's so Python-y, and it's so awesome,
and it's like so expressive, I love it, I miss it, okay.
And then line.strip, which takes the new line off,
and so that's gonna read, you know,
just reads a little file, writes it out.
So we have to create a variable.
We'll call it 1,000 characters.
Now we are, and in Python, we could have any length
of characters in our file, and it would work.
But in C, now we're going to have to actually say
we can only handle up to 1,000 characters,
because we've declared the line that we're gonna use,
the line variable we're gonna read this in has 1,000.
There is a equivalent to the handle.
File is a type, it's defined in STDIO.H, star hand,
which means it's a pointer to a file object.
And hand equals fopen, romeo.text, r,
so that's two character arrays, romeo.txt and r.
And actually, the open in Python is inspired
by the fopen in C, and that's 'cause, again,
when they were writing Python, they were writing it in C,
why don't we take an open, and all they did
was made the open in Python be a little easier.
So we don't have any kind of a io for in,
so we have to write our own while loop here.
So we're gonna call fget s, line,
give me up to 1,000 characters
from the file handle named hand.
And fget s returns null, which is a constant
that's defined in STDIO.H, if it reaches end of file.
So this basically is a loop that says
read everything up till end of file.
Very similar to this for line in hand.
And then we're printing it.
Now, I don't have to strip it because fget s
actually takes the new line that is the end of each line.
So in Python, you would get double spacing
if you didn't strip the new line
at the end of each one of these little things, right?
Each line, whereas the fget s is nice enough
not to give us the new line.
So there we go.
So a counted loop.
Now, this honestly is not one of my favorite things
in Python, but this range is a generator
that's gonna generate the numbers zero through four.
For i in range, this is effectively
kind of a dynamically generated set.
And then we're gonna print it.
So we're gonna have zero, one, two, three, four.
In C, we of course have to declare
that i is gonna be an int.
And the for loop has three pieces separated by semicolons.
There's the initialization piece.
Now, PHP and JavaScript are the exact same thing.
So this looks familiar to you.
That's because you took those classes.
Congratulations.
So for i equals zero is the initialization
that says before the loop starts, set i to zero.
Then there is the middle part is the test
whether or not the loop should run or continue to run.
It's a top tested loop.
And so i less than five must be true
or the loop won't run at all.
But given that i is zero at the beginning,
it's less than five.
So it's gonna run at least once.
And then each time through the loop at the bottom,
after the loop is run, we're gonna add one to i
with a i++, a post increment operator.
And again, that line of code, PHP, JavaScript, Java,
all look the same except PHP has dollar signs
for variable prefixes, which bothers me,
but it is what it is.
And of course we have a block, curly brace,
open curly brace and close curly brace denote the block.
And then we simply print the variable out
and both bits of code produce the exact same output.
So if we get a little bit trickier,
we're going to take an example
from my Python for everybody class
and look at the max and min.
And because we need to prime the loop,
we're going to set our max val to none
and the min val to none.
And we're gonna do a middle tested infinite loop.
While true, we're gonna read the input line,
each line like five, two, nine.
We're gonna strip it just because.
We're gonna check to see if it's the string done.
If it is, we're gonna break out of the loop, right?
And then we're gonna convert it to an integer
and we're gonna check to see if max val is none
or the value we read is greater than max val.
We're gonna remember it.
And if min val is none or the value we just read
is less than min val, we're gonna remember it.
And when the loop finally reads all the way through,
we're gonna print out the maximum and the minimum.
So this is pretty much the same code
except we're using scanf with a %d format input format
and scanning into the val integer variable
and using ampersand to indicate that it's called by reference
and to replace the current val.
And then the rest of it's the same, right?
If it's the first one or we've got a larger one, we keep it.
If it's the first one or we got a smaller one,
we keep that one as well.
We loop through and it all goes.
Now, one thing that if we're using scanf,
as I mentioned before, scanf doesn't sort of stop
at the end of lines.
It keeps on going.
And so if I have five, two, and nine,
and again, we have to use Ctrl+D or EOF here to finish this,
or we have two, five, space two, five, space nine,
and then EOF, it does the same
because scanf is just looking for an integer.
It's really, it's algorithm.
We'll see this in chapter eight,
but the thing that it does, it's like get me an integer,
which means throw away stuff that's not an integer.
So away you go.
So that's a slightly more sephonic version
of this min-max using scanf.
And it doesn't suffer from the problem of using get us
and having to worry about the size of the arrays,
that's character arrays.
Here's a guessing game.
That's one of my favorite applications.
So we have an infinite loop,
the ultimate non-determinant loop,
a loop that you gotta examine to know
that it's gonna finish.
And in this particular one, we're just looping to EOF.
You're using try and accept.
Why?
Because line doesn't give you any return indication
that it's hit into file.
So we just have to like have it blow up
and then do an accept and then jump out.
Oh, well.
So we throw away the new line,
and then we convert the line to an integer,
and we say if guess is 42, nice work,
and then break, which gets out of the loop.
The break affects the loop, not the if.
And then LF, guess less than 42, too low,
else, print too high.
So this is a classic multi-way if.
We're gonna have an if,
you can have kind of as many LFs as you want,
dot, dot, dot, and then an else.
When you do the same thing in C,
we're gonna use the scan F pattern,
waiting till we see EOF.
If the guess is 42,
we print nice work, and then break.
Now we have to have curly braces here,
because that is a two-statement block,
and so if you're having more than one statement,
you've gotta do curly braces.
And then else, this else matches up with that if,
else, if, guess less than 42, print F.
Now, modern programmers would tend to put curly braces,
even though this is only one line,
but this print F is the statement connected to the if,
and it does not need curly braces,
'cause what comes after an if is a statement
or block of statements with curly braces.
And the same is true of this else.
The print F is the single statement,
so you would not see curly braces here.
And I would write this with curly braces,
but because the authors of the book
are really very succinct,
they tend to not put curly braces in,
so I'm calling your attention to that.
Now, a really important thing to call your attention to
is the difference between else, space, if, and elif.
Now, the high level is what we're doing in C
is not really a multi-way if.
What we're doing in Python is truly a multi-way if.
This if and elif and else
are really part of the same block of code.
But this else if is two keywords,
and so if you look at the first if,
the first if has one block of code,
which is the print F, nice work, and the break.
And then the else clause of the first if
is this entire block of code here,
which is if gets less than 42, print F, yada, yada,
and then another else.
And so this is a block.
So this is a block if, and in the else clause,
there is another block if.
And so if you look at this, really, the indentation
of this stuff ought to be in this,
like the else if part and the else,
that indentation should be further in.
Now, by convention, we don't add that indentation,
even though it's technically correct,
because this is an else, and then there's one statement,
and that statement is the if, okay?
And so we use this idiomatically
all the time.
It looks like a multi-way if, else if, else, but it's not.
It's actually a further and further deeply nested else if,
an else with an if inside the else,
and then another else with an if inside the else.
We just don't indent it.
We indent it, by convention, as if it were a multi-way if.
You don't need to know this precisely
when you are writing code, but I just wanna point that out
in case, like in the back of your mind, you're like,
why is Python called lf, which is one reserved word,
and why does C not have an lf, but instead has an else if?
I think when the Guido invented Python,
he said, look, that's a cool convention.
Let's make it actually part of the language,
rather than an idiomatic use of the language.
Okay, enough of that, enough of that.
Okay, calling by value functions.
This is pretty easy, right?
There's no def keyword.
You have the return value, the name of the function,
and the parameters, and then, of course,
before the curly braces,
you have to have the type of the parameters.
Those are not the type of the variables in the function.
Those are the type of the parameters.
In Python, you don't need to tell it what type they are.
Python is kind of a flexible, typeless language.
The type of a variable goes right along with it.
Any, you could be inside MyMult and say,
what kind of a thing is A?
And then A could be an integer, it could be a float,
it could be whatever, it could be a string, right?
Because that's an object, and an object can have a type,
whereas A is just a number, and you have to tell it in C,
that number that's coming in, it is an integer.
And if someone miscalls it in C, like put 6.0 here,
it just blows up, doesn't work right.
I mean, it might do something, it's just unexpected, right?
So there's no cleverness.
Now there might be some checking,
you might get a compiler warning that says,
how come it's an integer here, and it's a floating point here?
That will be dangerous, but it won't fix it for you,
and it doesn't automatically convert it.
Whereas if you did this in Python,
it would automatically convert.
So you have a far greater responsibility
to match your types up in C.
Things like return statement, pretty much functions the same.
That was, you know, the Python return statement
is an imitation of the C return statement.
You do have to declare your variable types
that aren't going to be used temporary inside the function.
Scope-wise, right, this C is not outside,
and we will see later when we get to the functions chapter
about external values and static values, et cetera.
But the default scoping is that any variable
that you declare inside of a function
only lives inside the function.
There is no A, B, or C in the main code,
and that's the same as how Python works.
Whew, that's a lot of Rosetta stone.
We talked about input-output, we talked about looping,
we talked about reading a file,
we've talked about strings,
which are really character arrays.
We've talked about float.
And later, later, later, later, later,
we're gonna learn a lot.
Chapters five and six are the crazy chapters,
but we're going to play with how would we implement
some of the things that Python strings,
lists, and dictionaries handle.
And before this course is over,
we're going to come back and get inside the mind
of what it would take to build Python using the C language.
So we'll see how alloc, structures, pointers, et cetera,
character arrays can be used to build string object,
list object, and dict object.
And that, to me, is the learning objective of this course,
is not so much how to code C because it's your job,
but what in C is necessary to make a higher level language
like Python or JavaScript or Java or C# work.
And we'll get to that before the end of the course.
It is a long course, and again, this was a long lecture.
This takes some time to absorb.
And just zooming through this,
you achieve nothing if you just do the homework
without understanding it, so take your time.
I put the lines in this lecture,
the lines of code are there very much on purpose.
Every single one is trying to teach something.
So I hope you'll take the time to learn all this material.
Cheers.
(gentle music)